'\" t
.\" @(#)rat.1 3.1 97/02/22 
.\" Copyright (c) 1997-2000 University College London.
.\" Written by Orion Hodson
.\"
.TH rat 1 "14 January 2000"
.SH NAME
rat \- unicast and multicast audio conferencing tool
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B rat    
.RB [options] 
.I address/port
.SH DESCRIPTION
.LP
.I RAT 
is a network audio conferencing and streaming application with
support for multiple sampling rates, error concealment, and redundant
audio encoding.  Transmissions can be between two participants directly
(unicast) or between a group of participants on a common multicast
address.

To initiate a unicast conference the user specifies the 
.I address 
of the destination 
host name or IP address and a port number.  To participate in a 
multicast conference a Class D group address should be specified
together with a 
.I port 
number.  The application uses the greatest even 
integer less than or equal to the port specified for data (RTP) and 
the port above for control messages (RTCP).  The protocols RTP and 
RTCP used are specified in RFC 1889.

.SH OPTIONS
The following options are supported:
.TP
.BI -agc " 1|0"
Enable automatic gain control (AGC).
.TP
.BI -allowloopback
Causes rtp packets to be loopbacked during multicast
sessions.
.TP
.BI \-crypt " key"
Enable encryption, with the specified key. Encryption is
done using DES, and is believed compatible with encrypting
versions of vat.
.TP
.BI -C " name"
Sets the RAT window title to 
.I name.	
.TP
.BI -E " email"
Sets the 
.I email
address transmitted to remote participants.
.TP
.BI \-f " codec"
Specifies the primary encoding used when transmitting audio.
.TP
.BI -L " location"
Sets the 
.I location
description transmitted to remote participants.
.TP
.BI -N " username"
Sets the 
.I username 
transmitted to remote participants.
.TP
.BI -P " phone"
Sets the 
.I phone
number transmitted to remote participants.
.TP
.BI -pt " type/codec"
Specifies the payload type to be used for 
.I codec.
.TP
.BI -r " codec/offset"
Specifies the coding used for the redundant encoder and the offset
of the redundant encoding relative to the primary in audio frames.
.TP
.BI -repair " method"
Specifies the use of receiver based repair technique based on
.I method.  
This can currently be none or repeat.   
.TP
.BI -t " ttl"
Specifies the TTL (time to live) 
value set in the packet 
headers.  This limits 
the scope of the packets. 
The following 
values are generally considered	
appropriate:  
.RS 10n
.nf
.ta 
  4 campus/organization
 16 country
 64 continent
127 planet
.fi
.RE
.TP
.BI -silence " 1|0"
Turns silence suppression on or off.
.TP
.B -version
Displays the version number.

.SH USER INTERFACE

.SS Main Window

The main window of RAT is split into three sections.  At the top of
the window are the audio device port and volume selectors, and the
mutes for incoming and outgoing audio.  In the middle the list of
participants shows local and remote conference members.  Active
speakers are highlighted. Clicking the left mouse button on the name
of a remote participant will display a user information panel, giving
various reception statistics for that user.  Individuals can be
selectively muted by clicking on them with the middle mouse button on
three button systems, or moving the mouse to the individual and
pressing the m.  At the bottom of the window are buttons for the
options panel, the about panel, and to quit.

Pressing the right mouse button anywhere within the RAT window will
temporarily toggle the state of the audio input mute: this allows a
"push-to-talk" mode of operation.

.SS Options

RAT supports a large number of options and pressing the "options"
button will launch the optinos panel.  The best approach to see what
is available is to go and explore.  The options panel has a category
menu at the top and by clicking on it options in the different
categories are presented.  

.TP 
.B Personal
User details that are conveyed to other conference participants.

.TP	
.B Transmission
Allows the selection of codec used for transmission, the setting of
the number, of units of audio per packet, and the selection of
redundant audio data.

.TP
.B Reception
Options that control how received audio is decoded.

.TP
.B Audio
Options to select and configure the available audio device, and
features that pertain to audio handling (i.e. silence suppression,
agc, audio loopback, and echo suppression).

.TP
.B Codecs
Displays details on available codecs and allows for them to be assigned
to alternate RTP payload numbers.  Map payload numbers at your own peril.

.TP
.B Security
Allows DES encryption of audio for incoming and outgoing streams.

.TP
.B Interface
Allows users to control balloon help, enable lip synchronization with
suitably modified versions of 
.I VIC
, and displaying of windows for reception quality and file playback and recording.

	
.SH EXAMPLES
To start a unicast session between 
the current host and the host
shrew.cs.ucl.ac.uk using port 12000 type:

		rat shrew.cs.ucl.ac.uk/12000

To join a multicast session on group address 224.5.6.7 and port 8110
type, using primary encoding of dvi and a secondary encoding of lpc:

		rat -f dvi/lpc 224.5.6.7/8110

.SH AUTHORS
This version of RAT was written by Orion Hodson
<O.Hodson@cs.ucl.ac.uk> and Colin Perkins <C.Perkins@cs.ucl.ac.uk> in
the Networked Multimedia Group, University College London.  Markus
Iken contributed the 3d rendering code. Bob's Olson and Lindell contributed
the ALSA audio interface.

The first version of RAT was developed by Vicky Hardman 
<V.Hardman@cs.ucl.ac.uk> and Isidor Kouvelas <I.Kouvelas@cs.ucl.ac.uk>
at University College London.  The DES encryption was written by
Saleem Bhatti <S.Bhatti@cs.ucl.ac.uk> and integrated by Darren Harris.

RAT has been supported by the following projects:
.RS 4
.TS
MICE	 Multimedia Conferencing in Europe (ESPRIT)

MERCI	 Multimedia European Research Conferencing Integration

ReLaTe	 Remote Language Teaching for Super Janet (BT/JISC)

RAT	 Robust Audio Tool (EPSRC/BT)
.TE
.RE

This software has benefited from hardware donations by Sun
Microsystems and Hewlett Packard, and software donations by Microsoft.

.SH ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

We thank Roy Bennett, Davide Cavagnino, Jon Crowcroft, Ross Finlayson,
Atanu Ghosh, Terry Gibbons, Jeremy Hall, Mark Handley, Marcus Iken,
Iain McKay, Roman Kurmanowyts, Robert Olson, Fulvio Risso, Roy
Rodenstein, Lorenzo Vicisano, Anna Watson, Michael Wallbaum, Hui Zhao,
and our collegues at UCL who have provided countless suggestions and
extended good humour through the buggy pre-releases.

Modifications for HP-UX by Terje Vernly <terjeve@usit.uio.no>
and Geir Harald Hansen <g.h.hansen@usit.uio.no>.

This software is derived, in part, from publically available source 
code with the following copyright:

Copyright (c) 1991-1993,1996 Regents of the University of California.

Copyright (c) 1992 Stichting Mathematisch Centrum, Amsterdam.

Copyright (c) 1991,1992 RSA Data Security, Inc.

Copyright (c) 1992 Jutta Degener and Carsten Bormann, Technische 
Universitaet Berlin.

Copyright (c) 1994 Henning Schulzrinne.

Copyright (c) 1994 Paul Stewart.

This product includes software developed by the Computer Systems
Engineering Group and by the Network Research Group at Lawrence 
Berkeley Laboratory.
 
Encryption features of this software use the RSA Data Security, Inc. 
MD5 Message-Digest Algorithm.
.SH FEEDBACK
Please send comments, bug-reports, patches, and suggestions to
rat-trap@cs.ucl.ac.uk.

Please check http://www-mice.cs.ucl.ac.uk/multimedia/software for
latest release information.


